PROTOCOLS FOR HOUSING INTAKES

Housing is focusing on eviction lawsuits. Thus, we ask workers to do intakes on court
matters only. (There are a few exceptions listed below.)

Court Summons The court matters we will mostly take are cases with summons dates,
(first court date, non-trial date). This includes subsidized housing and private
landlord/tenant as usual.

Other Court Matters
We will also take default judgments, consent judgments, cases
already set for trial, and sheriff evictions with the following limitations.
Default Judgment: If caller contacts us within Ten (10) calendar days from the
date of the default judgment, then please do the intake.

Cases Already set for Trial: If the caller contacts LSEM at least Ten (10) calendar
days from the date of the trial, then it is OK to do the intake.

Sheriff Evictions Posted and Consent Judgments: Call and/or email me before
doing the intake. We will take these, but are limited based on the specific facts of
the case, which I have to look at before agreeing to open a case.
Section 8
Please do an intake for a caller facing a proposed termination of Section 8, i.e. if the
caller has received a proposed termination of Section 8 notice from their local housing authority.

Domestic Violence
If domestic violence is present, they should call for a full screening.

Other Housing Matters
For other Housing matters, please refer the caller to the Housing section of
our website.

Uninhabitable Conditions in Rental Property. We will only defend against or sue a landlord
when there are extremely poor conditions (no heat, sewage backup, etc.) or the landlord has
engaged in outrageous conduct (lockout, theft, utility shut-off, etc.).
Older Adults 60+ St. Louis City: All of the above + utility shut-offs and elder financial abuse
>$5,000.

g. Landlord Tenant Lawsuits Lawsuits or pre-lawsuits tenant has good claims against
the landlord, management, or landlord lawyer
i. Conditions: Tenant must have notified Landlord of conditions issues and landlord
has failed to address issues after notice. Any conditions of the premises that are
bad enough that a reasonable person would move out if they could. Minor issues
are not sufficient! Examples:
1. Threat to safety and security of unit (doors won’t lock, windows can’t close,
exit doors boarded over, etc.
2. No heat or ventilation
3. Water leaks causing damage to property
4. Plumbing: no water, no hot water, sewage backups, damages to property
from leaks, etc.
5. Vermin, overwhelming and affecting health and safety of occupants.
6. Bedbugs
ii. Recent (within 30 days) Unfair or Outrageous Landlord Activities such as:
1. Lockouts, utility shut-offs, nailing doors/windows shut,
2. Renting condemned property
3. Self-help eviction by landlord
4. Taking or destroying of tenant property

4. HOUSING - Tenant Claims Against Landlords
a. ONLY IF tenant has solid damage claims against the landlord, management, or
landlord lawyer.
b. Bad Conditions: Tenant must have notified Landlord of conditions issues and landlord
has failed to address issues after notice. Any conditions of the premises that are bad
enough that a reasonable person would move out if they could. Examples:
i. Security of unit (doors won’t lock, windows can’t close, etc.)
ii. No heat or ventilation
iii. Leaking roof causing damage
iv. Plumbing causing sewage backups
v. Vermin that are overwhelming and directly affecting health and safety of
occupants.
vi. Bedbugs, etc.
c. Unfair or Outrageous Landlord Activities (within last 30 days or so) such as:
i. Lockouts, utility shut-offs, nailing doors/windows shut
ii. Renting condemned property
iii. Self-help eviction by landlord
iv. Taking or destroying of tenant personal property